Mickiewicz was born on December 24, 1798 and died on November 26, 1855. He was born near
the Polish town of Nowogrodek, into a family of the Polish nobility. At the time Nowogrodek part
of the Russian Empire. Mickiewicz was educated at the University of Vilnius (Wilno in Polish),
where he became involed in an underground Polish-Lithuanian freedom group. After his studies
he worked as a high school tutor in Kaunas (Kowno in Polish).
Mickiewicz was arrested in 1823, at the age of 25, for his political activities. He had already
published two highly acclaimed volumes of poetry, and when he was banished to Russia, and St.
Petersburg, he was welcomed into the most important literary circles. He gained a reputation of
his poetic improvisations and even traveled to the Crimea, where he produced his first major
work—The Crimean Sonnets.
In 1823, he published Konrad Wallenrod, a heroic narrative about the conflicts between the
pagan Lithuania warriors and the Teutonic Knights—which was seen by Poles as a thinly veiled
tirade against Russian domination.
Mickiewicz remained in exile in Russia for five years, and when he was permitted to leave, vowed
never to return to his native Lithuania as long was it remained under Russian rule. He traveled to
Germany, met Goethe, visited Italian cities, and eventually settled in Rome. There he wrote
Forefathers Eve (Dziady), which was based on various Slavic and Pagan religious rituals, though
like Konrad Wallenod, it was also profoundly political.
In 1832, at the age of 34, Mickiewicz moved to Paris. His early days there were full of poverty
and despair, until he married Celina Szymanowski, a Polish woman living in exile—who
interestingly came from a Jewish family that converted to Catholicism in the wake of the failed
Jewish Messiah, Jacob Frank. Celina eventually went insane, but Mickiewicz managed to gain a
position as professor of Slavic languages and literature at the College de France. This
appointment lasted a mere three years, though, as Mickiewicz fell under the influence of the
mystical philosphy of Andrzej Towianski, which was a strange combination of religion and politics.
After several failed journalistic ventures, in 1855 Mickiewicz ventured to Turkey during the
Crimean War. His aim was to organize a Polish military brigade to enter the war to fight Russia.
He was accompanied by his friend Armand Levy, who was similarly attempting to organize a
Jewish Legion. While visiting a military camp near Constantinople, Mickiewicz contracted cholera
and died that same year. 
O Lithuania, my native land,
you are like health--so valued when lost
beyond recovery; let these words now stand
restoring you, redeeming exile's cost.
Holy Virgin, defender of the Shrine
at Czestochowa, who illuminates 1
the Ostra Gate in Vilno, whose sign 2
revealed as one of her protectorates
the walled Novogrodek--who saved me once
with her miraculous glow. My tearful mother
entrusted me (it was her only chance,
I was near death) so when there was no other
cure, she helped to open up my eyes,
and once my lids were raised, though weak, I made
a pilgrimage to offer thanks and praise.
This memory of resurrection has stayed
alive in me since childhood; it makes
me hope a homesick exile might return
to wooded hills, green meadows, and the lakes
spread round the River Nieman--that I'd be borne
back to that womb of gilded wheat and rye
turned silver, to the amber mustard row,
buckwheat snow, and clover, burning like a shy
girl's blush--to strips of turf, ribbons that show
boundaries with green. All this I see
so clearly, down to each blossoming pear tree.
A larchwood manor stood upon the banks
of a stream, dividing groves of birch, its stone
foundation propping up the solid ranks
7
of oak beams and whitewashed walls, which shone
in stark relief against the darker green
of poplars all around. A barn attested
to abundant stores of grain, unseen,
and more in fields waiting to be harvested.
Black earth, gridded from countless plows,
fallow land, flowerbed, and garden--
everything about the farmstead shows
its owner's lot is prosperous. Even
stranger would face, like guest, a welcome sight,
a gate, open by day, unlatched at night.
A young man raced his carriage through the yard,
halted his team by the porch and vaulted down.
His horses dragged the coach, and panting hard,
began to graze. The door was shut, the lawn
deserted--anxiously he rushed to greet
inhabitant and house alike, unlatched
the lock, dismayed he found no one to meet.
The youth was only recently dispatched
from a distant city where he'd gone to school.
Now finished with his studies, he relearns
the old floor planks, eager to roam and rule
halls hung with tapestries. Now he returns
to find that nothing is unchanged. The halls
all seem less grand, perhaps a little quainter.
The portraits he remembers still grace the walls:
Kosciuszko in Cracovian dress. (The painter
3
surely had in mind the time he swore,
clutching his sword, his eyes to heaven cast,
he'd drive the occupier from the door
of every Pole, or make this act his last.)
Rejtan was next, mourning his freedom's loss;
4
knife stuck in his own breast by his own hand,
(Plutarch's Life of Cato open across
his desk.) Next was Jasinski, his last stand:
5
the hero, young, handsome, and melancholy,
beside Korsak, comrades to the end.
6
(They stand in trenches aware of their huge folly:
dead Russians all around; they can't defend
Warsaw--engulfed by flames from the attack.)
Tadeusz sees the antique chiming clock,
recalling how he'd tug a string in back;
repeating it provides a pleasing shock,
the same Mazurka of Dombrowski plays
He scours the house, searching for the room,
ten years unseen, where he had spent the days
of childhood. But now he must assume that all has changed, finding that change quite bold.
What happened here? It seems someone rolled
a piano in, and songsheets--such disorder!
Clearly female hands had made this mess:
a hanger on the floor, a lace border--
half-draped upon a chair, an evening dress.
Fragrant plants were lined up in a row:
geranium, carnation, aster, and violet.
The young man spots new marvels down below:
right by the stream, where once there was a thicket
full of nettles, now a garden thrived,
criss
-crossed by tiny paths, with clumps of mint
and English grass. There was a fencepost carved
with some initials, daisies and ribbons pinned
and marking it. The flowers were all slick
and wet; someone had sprinkled half the can
and left the garden, making such a quick
getaway, the gate still swung. Whoever ran
left shoeless footprints in the sand, though shallow,
as if these feet had barely skimmed the ground.
The traveler stood and mused beside the window,
inhaling all the scents. In his profound
confusion, he began to lean too far,
as if drawn to the garden and the path,
almost tumbling out. He began to stare
at something in the distance, taking his breath
away--a girl dressed in white, her slight
body almost uncovered, shoulders and
a swan
-like neck revealed! Such a sight
is rare in Lithuania, a land
where modesty prevails. And though she thought
she was unseen, her arms were shyly crossed
to screen herself. Her hair was twisted taut
and wrapped around white paper strips--and lost,
for now, the ringlets coiled and dangling free.
And yet the rays of morning sunlight drowned
her in such a strange embellished glow, she
seemed to be a holy icon crowned.
KONIEC PLIKU POWINIEN BYC